Create config plugins guide (#12421)
expo/expo: docs/pages/guides/config-plugins.md

**Quick facts**

- Plugins are functions that can change values on your Expo config.
- Plugins are mostly meant to be used with [`expo eject`][cli-eject] or `eas build` commands.
- We recommend you use plugins with `app.config.json` or `app.config.js` instead of `app.json` (no top-level `expo` object is required).
- `mods` are async functions that modify native project files, such as source code or configuration (plist, xml) files.
- Changes performed with `mods` will require rebuilding the affected native projects.
- `mods` are removed from the public app manifest.
- 💡 Everything in the Expo config must be able to be converted to JSON (with the exception of the `mods` field). So no async functions outside of `mods` in your config plugins!

## Using a plugin in your app

Expo config plugins mostly come from node modules, you can install them just like other packages in your project.

For instance, `expo-camera` has a plugin that adds camera permissions to the `Info.plist` and `AndroidManifest.xml`.

Install it in your project:

```sh
yarn add expo-camera
```

> In your app's Expo config (app.json, or app.config.js), add `expo-camera` to the list of plugins:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your app's Expo config (`app.json`, or `app.config.js`), add `expo-camera` to the list of plugins:
```

And that's it! Now you're using Config plugins. No more having to interact with the native projects!

> 💡 Check out all the different ways you can import `plugins`: [plugin module resolution](#Plugin-module-resolution)

## What are plugins

Plugins are **synchronous** functions that accept an [`ExpoConfig`][config-docs] and return a modified [`ExpoConfig`][config-docs].

- Plugins should be named using the following convention: `with<Plugin Functionality>` i.e. `withFacebook`.
- Plugins should be synchronous and their return value should be serializable, except for any `mods` that are added.
- Optionally, a second argument can be passed to the plugin to configure it.
- `plugins` are always invoked when the config is read by `@expo/config`s `getConfig` method. However, the `mods` are only invoked during the "syncing" phase of `expo eject`.

## Creating a plugin

> 💡 Hands-on learners: Try this [sandbox](https://codesandbox.io/s/expo-config-plugins-basic-example-xopto?file=/src/project/app.config.js) (check the terminal logs).

Here is an example of the most basic config plugin:

```ts
const withNothing = config => config;
```

> Say you wanted to create a plugin which added custom values to the native iOS Info.plist:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Say you wanted to create a plugin which added custom values to `Info.plist` in an iOS project:
```

  return config;
};
```

`app.config.json`

```json
{
  "name": "my-app",
  "plugins": ["./my-plugin", "app"]
}
```

↓ ↓ ↓

**Evaluated config JSON**

```json
{
  "name": "custom-app",
  "plugins": ["./my-plugin", "app"]
}
```

### Chaining plugins

Once you add a few plugins, your `app.config.js` code can become difficult to read and manipulate. To combat this, `@expo/config-plugins` provides a `withPlugins` function which can be used to chain plugins together and execute them in order.

```js
/// Create a config
const config = {
  name: 'my app',
};

// ❌ Hard to read
withDelta(withFoo(withBar(config, 'input 1'), 'input 2'), 'input 3');

// ✅ Easy to read
import { withPlugins } from '@expo/config-plugins';

withPlugins(config, [
  [withBar, 'input 1'],
  [withFoo, 'input 2'],
  // When no input is required, you can just pass the method...
  withDelta,
]);
```

To support JSON configs, we also added the `plugins` array which just uses `withPlugins` under the hood.
Here is the same config as above, but even simpler:

```js
export default {
  name: 'my app',
  plugins: [
    [withBar, 'input 1'],
    [withFoo, 'input 2'],
    [withDelta, 'input 3'],
  ],
};
```

## What are mods

> An async function which accepts a config and a data object, then manipulates and returns both as an object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A modifier (mod for short) is an async function which accepts a config and a data object, then manipulates and returns both as an object.
```

> Modifiers (mods for short) are added to the `mods` object of the Expo config. The `mods` object is different to the rest of the Expo config because it doesn't get serialized after the initial reading, this means you can use it to perform actions _during_ code generation. If possible, you should attempt to use basic plugins instead of mods as they're simpler to work with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mods are added to the `mods` object of the Expo config. The `mods` object is different to the rest of the Expo config because it doesn't get serialized after the initial reading, this means you can use it to perform actions _during_ code generation. If possible, you should attempt to use basic plugins instead of mods as they're simpler to work with.
```

> - `mods` are omitted from the manifest and **cannot** be accessed via `Updates.manifest`. mods exist for the sole purpose of modifying native files during code generation!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `mods` are omitted from the manifest and **cannot** be accessed via `Updates.manifest`. Mods exist for the sole purpose of modifying native project files during code generation!
```

> - `mods` can be used to read and write files safely during the `expo eject` command. This is how Expo CLI modifies the Info.plist, entitlements, xcproj, etc...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `mods` can be used to read and write files safely during the `expo eject` command. This is how Expo CLI modifies the `Info.plist`, entitlements, xcproj, etc...
```

- `mods` are platform specific and should always be added to a platform specific object:

`app.config.js`

```js
module.exports = {
  name: 'my-app',
  mods: {
    ios: {
      /* iOS mods... */
    },
    android: {
      /* Android mods... */
    },
  },
};
```

## How mods work

- The config is read using `getConfig` from `@expo/config`
- All of the core functionality supported by Expo is added via plugins in `withExpoIOSPlugins`. This is stuff like name, version, icons, locales, etc.
- The config is passed to the compiler `compileModifiersAsync`
- The compiler adds base mods which are responsible for reading data (like `Info.plist`), executing a named mod (like `mods.ios.infoPlist`), then writing the results to the file system.
- The compiler iterates over all of the mods and asynchronously evaluates them, providing some base props like the `projectRoot`.
  - After each mod, error handling asserts if the mod chain was corrupted by an invalid mod.

<!-- TODO: Move to a section about mod compiler -->

> 💡 Here is a [colorful chart](https://whimsical.com/UjytoYXT2RN43LywvWExfK) of the mod compiler for visual learners.

### Best practices for mods

> - Avoid doing long tasks like making fetch requests or installing node modules in mods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Avoid doing long tasks like making fetch requests or installing Node modules in mods.
```

- `mods.android.manifest` -- Modify the `android/app/src/main/AndroidManifest.xml` as JSON (parsed with [`xml2js`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/xml2js)).
- `mods.android.strings` -- Modify the `android/app/src/main/res/values/strings.xml` as JSON (parsed with [`xml2js`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/xml2js)).
- `mods.android.mainActivity` -- Modify the `android/app/src/main/<package>/MainActivity.java` as a string.
- `mods.android.appBuildGradle` -- Modify the `android/app/build.gradle` as a string.
- `mods.android.projectBuildGradle` -- Modify the `android/build.gradle` as a string.
- `mods.android.settingsGradle` -- Modify the `android/settings.gradle` as a string.
- `mods.android.gradleProperties` -- Modify the `android/gradle.properties` as a `Properties.PropertiesItem[]`.

After the mods are resolved, the contents of each mod will be written to disk. Custom default mods can be added to support new native files.
For example, you can create a mod to support the `GoogleServices-Info.plist`, and pass it to other mods.

### Mod plugins

> Mods are responsible for a lot of things, so they can be pretty difficult to understand at first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mods are responsible for a lot of tasks, so they can be pretty difficult to understand at first.
```

- `modRequest`: Additional properties supplied by the mod compiler.
  - `projectRoot: string`: Project root directory for the universal app.
  - `platformProjectRoot: string`: Project root for the specific platform.
  - `modName: string`: Name of the mod.
  - `platform: ModPlatform`: Name of the platform used in the mods config.
  - `projectName?: string`: iOS only: The path component used for querying project files. ex. `projectRoot/ios/[projectName]/`

## Creating a mod

Say you wanted to write a mod to update the Xcode Project's "product name":

```ts
import { ConfigPlugin, withXcodeProject } from '@expo/config-plugins';

const withCustomProductName: ConfigPlugin = (config, customName) => {
  return withXcodeProject(config, async config => {
    // config = { modResults, modRequest, ...expoConfig }

    const xcodeProject = config.modResults;
    xcodeProject.productName = customName;

    return config;
  });
};

// 💡 Usage:

/// Create a config
const config = {
  name: 'my app',
};

/// Use the plugin
export default withCustomProductName(config, 'new_name');
```

### Experimental functionality

> Some parts of the mod system aren't fully flushed out, these parts use `withDangerousModifier` to read/write data without a base mod. These methods essentially act as their own base mod and cannot be extended. Icons for example, currently use the dangerous mod to perform a single generation step with no ability to customize the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some parts of the mod system aren't fully fleshed out, these parts use `withDangerousModifier` to read/write data without a base mod. These methods essentially act as their own base mod and cannot be extended. Icons, for example, currently use the dangerous mod to perform a single generation step with no ability to customize the results.
```

```ts
export const withIcons: ConfigPlugin = config => {
  return withDangerousModifier(config, async config => {
    // No modifications are made to the config
    await setIconsAsync(config, config.modRequest.projectRoot);
    return config;
  });
};
```

Be careful using `withDangerousModifier` as it is subject to change in the future.
The order with which it gets executed is not reliable either.
Currently dangerous mods run first before all other modifiers, this is because we use dangerous mods internally for large file system refactoring like when the package name changes.

## Plugin module resolution

The strings passed to the `plugins` array can be resolved in a few different ways.

> Any resolution pattern that isn't specified below is unexpected behavior, and subject to breaking changes.

### Project file

You can quickly create a plugin in your project and use it in your config.

- ✅ `'./my-config-plugin'`
- ❌ `'./my-config-plugin.js'`

```
╭── app.config.js ➡️ Expo Config
╰── my-config-plugin.js ➡️ ✅ `module.exports = (config) => config`
```

### app.plugin.js

> Sometimes you want your package to export React components and also support a plugin, to do this, multiple entry points need to be used (because the transpilation (Babel preset) may be different).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you want your package to export React components and also support a plugin. To do this, multiple entry points need to be used because the transpilation (Babel preset) may be different.
```

> If a `app.plugin.js` file is present in the root of a Node module's folder, it'll be used instead of the package's `main` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an `app.plugin.js` file is present in the root of a Node module's folder, it'll be used instead of the package's `main` file.
```

import { ExpoConfig } from '@expo/config-types';

// Using helpers keeps error messages unified and helps cut down on XML format changes.
const { addMetaDataItemToMainApplication, getMainApplicationOrThrow } = AndroidConfig.Manifest;

export const withMyCustomConfig: ConfigPlugin = config => {
  return withAndroidManifest(config, async config => {
    // Modifiers can be async, but try to keep them fast.
    config.modResults = await setCustomConfigAsync(config, config.modResults);
    return config;
  });
};

// Splitting this function out of the mod makes it easier to test.
async function setCustomConfigAsync(
  config: Pick<ExpoConfig, 'android'>,
  androidManifest: AndroidConfig.Manifest.AndroidManifest
): Promise<AndroidConfig.Manifest.AndroidManifest> {
  const appId = 'my-app-id';
  // Get the <application /> tag and assert if it doesn't exist.
  const mainApplication = getMainApplicationOrThrow(androidManifest);

  addMetaDataItemToMainApplication(
    mainApplication,
    // value for `android:name`
    'my-app-id-key',
    // value for `android:value`
    appId
  );

  return androidManifest;
}
```

### Modifying the Info.plist

> Using the `withInfoPlist` is a bit safer than statically modifying the `expo.ios.infoPlist` object in the app.json because it reads the contents of the Info.plist and merges it with the `expo.ios.infoPlist`, this means you can attempt to keep your changes from being overwritten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `withInfoPlist` is a bit safer than statically modifying the `expo.ios.infoPlist` object in the `app.json` because it reads the contents of the Info.plist and merges it with the `expo.ios.infoPlist`, this means you can attempt to keep your changes from being overwritten.
```

// A helper method that wraps `withRunOnce` and appends items to `pluginHistory`.
export default createRunOncePlugin(
  // The plugin to guard.
  withMyCoolPlugin,
  // An identifier used to track if the plugin has already been run.
  pkg.name,
  // Optional version property, if omitted, defaults to UNVERSIONED.
  pkg.version
);
```

## Debugging

You can debug config plugins by running `EXPO_DEBUG=1 expo prebuild`. If `EXPO_DEBUG` is enabled, the plugin stack logs will be printed, these are useful for viewing which mods ran, and in what order they ran in. To view all static plugin resolution errors, enable `EXPO_CONFIG_PLUGIN_VERBOSE_ERRORS`, this should only be needed for plugin authors.
By default some automatic plugin errors are hidden because they're usually related to versioning issues and aren't very helpful (i.e. legacy package doesn't have a config plugin yet).

Running `expo prebuild --clean` with remove the generated native folders before compiling.

You can also run `expo config --type prebuild` to print the results of the plugins with the mods unevaluated (no code is generated).

Expo CLI commands can be profiled using `EXPO_PROFILE=1`.

## Legacy plugins

> In order to make `eas build` work the same as the legacy `expo build` we added support for "legacy plugins" which are applied automatically to a project when they're installed in the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to make `eas build` work the same as the classic `expo build` service, we added support for "legacy plugins" which are applied automatically to a project when they're installed in the project.
```

> For instance, say a project has `expo-camera` installed but doesn't have `plugins: ['expo-camera']` in their app.json. Expo CLI would automatically add `expo-camera` to the plugins so the camera and microphone permissions were always added to the project. The user can still customize the `expo-camera` plugin by adding it to the `plugins` array manually, the manually defined plugins will take precedence over the automatic plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, say a project has `expo-camera` installed but doesn't have `plugins: ['expo-camera']` in their `app.json`. Expo CLI would automatically add `expo-camera` to the plugins to ensure that the required camera and microphone permissions are added to the project. The user can still customize the `expo-camera` plugin by adding it to the `plugins` array manually, and the manually defined plugins will take precedence over the automatic plugins.
```

You can debug which plugins were added by running `expo config --type prebuild` and seeing the `_internal.pluginHistory` property.

This will show an object with all plugins that were added using `withRunOnce` plugin from `@expo/config-plugins`.

Notice that `expo-location` uses `version: '11.0.0'`, and `react-native-maps` uses `version: 'UNVERSIONED'`. This means the following:

- `expo-location` and `react-native-maps` are both installed in the project.
- `expo-location` is using the plugin from the project's `node_modules/expo-location/app.plugin.js`
- The version of `react-native-maps` installed in the project doesn't have a plugin, so it's falling back on the unversioned plugin that is shipped with `expo-cli` for legacy support.

```js
{
  _internal: {
    pluginHistory: {
      'expo-location': {
        name: 'expo-location',
        version: '11.0.0',
      },
      'react-native-maps': {
        name: 'react-native-maps',
        version: 'UNVERSIONED',
      },
    },
  },
};
```

> For the most _stable_ experience, you should try to have no `UNVERSIONED` plugins in your project. This is because the UNVERSIONED plugin may not support the native code in your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the most _stable_ experience, you should try to have no `UNVERSIONED` plugins in your project. This is because the `UNVERSIONED` plugin may not support the native code in your project.
```

> For instance, say you have an `UNVERSIONED` facebook plugin in your project, if the facebook native code or plugin has a breaking change, that will break the way your project ejects and cause it to error on build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, say you have an `UNVERSIONED` Facebook plugin in your project, if the Facebook native code or plugin has a breaking change, that will break the way your project ejects and cause it to error on build.
```
